Adding plotting guides (#2025)
arviz-devs/arviz: doc/source/user_guide/plotting_with_bokeh.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(plotting_with_bokeh)=

# Plotting with Bokeh

Arviz has the option to use {doc}`Bokeh <bokeh:index>` as backend which offers interactive plots. Although most of the functions in the {ref}`plot <plot_api>` module work seamlessly with any backend, some advanced plots may require the use of backend specific features. In this guide, advanced plotting with Bokeh will be covered.

> This page can be downloaded as a {jupyter-download:script}`Python script <plotting_with_bokeh>`

Reviewer: didn't find any relevant difference, I'll assume it's an issue with the preview and if it breaks we'll fix it

or as a {jupyter-download:nb}`Jupyter notebook <plotting_with_bokeh>`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import arviz as az
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np

az.style.use("arviz-darkgrid")

# Confgure Bokeh as backend
az.rcParams["plot.backend"] = "bokeh"
az.output_notebook()
```

:::{note}
To display the plots as output in a Jupyter notebook, it's required to call the function  {func}`arviz.output_notebook` beforehand.
:::

:::{warning} Page in construction

> :::

Author: Deleted

> ## Customizing plots

Reviewer: I think the level 2 headers here and in "combining ArviZ and bokeh plots" might be a bit confusing. Even if generated through arviz, all plots generated here are also bokeh plots, and customizing could also include adding further elements to the plot, not only using the arguments available in arviz functions.

Seeing the differences in the separation I think the titles could be: "Bokeh specific arguments" and "Extending ArviZ-Bokeh plots" or something of the sort. Then we should also go to the plots arguments guide and replace the `ax, backend, show` sections with two links to the bokeh and matplotlib specific sections.

That being said, the level 3 headings look fine, I would not change them to be the argument name only like in the plot argument guide. They should however have their own anchors though, like in the plot argument guide. The end goal is to then update the docstrings to have links to the right sections in the corresponding parameter description and keep the examples in the docstring to plot specific arguments and examples.

Author: I changed the name and level of the header. Once the docs are ready, we can add the links in `Plots’ arguments guide`.

### Using `backend_kwargs`

The `backend_kwargs` argument can be very useful for some specific configuration. That is parameters available in {class}`bokeh:bokeh.plotting.figure.Figure`.

As an example, the following code changes the color background and the plot width.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load data
data = az.load_arviz_data('radon')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
az.plot_posterior(
    data,
    var_names=["g"],
    backend_kwargs={"width": 350, 
                    "background_fill_color": "#d3d0e3"});
```

### The parameter `show`

The parameter `show` is used to control whether the plot is displayed or not. This behavior can be useful when a plot will be displayed in a grid as the example in the following section.

### Defining custom axes

The `ax` argument of any `plot` function allows to use created axes manually. In the example, this parameter allows to arrange 2 different plots in a grid, set limit to the x axis and share the axes' ranges between the two plots.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from bokeh.io import show
from bokeh.layouts import gridplot, row
from bokeh.plotting import figure

# load data

> observed_data = data.observed_data.y.to_numpy()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
observed_data = data.observed_data.y.values
```

not completely sure what `to_numpy()` method does, but afaik, the recommended ways to access the underlying arrays in xarray.DataArray is `.values` if we want the data as a numpy array or `.data` if we want the actual array structure used by xarray to store the data in that case (defaults to numpy but can already be dask or pydata/sparse and they are working to extend it to arbitrary array libraries)

Author: `to_numpy()` was replaced by `values`.

# create axes
f1 = figure(x_range=(observed_data.min() - 1, observed_data.max() + 1))
f2 = figure(x_range=f1.x_range, y_range=f1.y_range)
# plot
az.plot_ppc(data, group="prior", num_pp_samples=100, show=False, ax=f1)
az.plot_ppc(data, group="posterior", num_pp_samples=100, show=False, ax=f2)

show(gridplot([[f1], [f2]]))
```

## Combining ArviZ and Bokeh plots

Arviz plot returns a {class}`~bokeh.plotting.Figure` object, therefore different Bokeh plots can be combined into a plot created using Arviz:

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load data
data = az.load_arviz_data('regression1d')
X = data.observed_data.y_dim_0.to_numpy()
Y = data.observed_data.y.to_numpy()

> predictions = data.posterior_predictive.y.to_numpy()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
y_pp = data.posterior_predictive.y.to_numpy()
```

or `post_pred`, `pps`, `y_post_pred`, inverted order... The comment is basically about avoiding the use of the word "predictions" in that context as it can be confusing. In ArviZ we have a group called `posterior_predictive` and a group called `predictions`. Both are used to store posterior predictive samples that can also/always be called predictions if you want, but we make this distinction to reduce the complexity of arviz code. 

The posterior_predictive group should store pp samples aiming to predict the same data that was already observed (kind of -but not really- as if it hadn't been observed) which might seem a bit pointless but is very useful for model criticism. These samples are therefore used to perform posterior predictive checks: comparing the actual observed data to these samples because if the model is correct, it should not be possible to distinguish these synthetic/simulated observations from the real ones.

The predictions group stored pp samples that aim to predict on new/unobserved data

Author: Variable renamed

Author: And now I got the names...a bit confusing 😅

# plot
f1 = figure(plot_width=600, plot_height=600, toolbar_location="below")
az.plot_hdi(X, predictions, color="#b5a7b6", show=False, ax=f1)
f1.scatter(X, Y, marker="circle", fill_color="#0d7591")

show(f1)
```

Similarly, custom axes allow to display Arviz and Matplotlib plots in the same grid. In this example, the plot in `ax1` has an Arviz plot modified with a Matplotlib plot and the `ax2` has a `scatter` created using Matplotlib.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load data
observed_data = data.observed_data.y.to_numpy()
# create axes
f1 = figure(plot_width=400, plot_height=400, toolbar_location="below")
f2 = figure(plot_width=400, plot_height=400, toolbar_location="below")
# plot
az.plot_hdi(X, predictions, color="#b5a7b6", show=False, ax=f1)
f1.line(X, predictions.mean(axis=(0, 1)), color="black")
f2.scatter(X, Y, marker="circle", fill_color="#0d7591")

> show(row(f1, f2))

Reviewer: Would `show_layout` help here? https://python.arviz.org/en/latest/api/utils.html#bokeh-utils. Keep in mind I am not an avid bokeh user. I don't know if you didn't know about it, if it is not documented enough (which in this case seems like a safe bet to at least be a factor) and/or if it relies too much on rcparams and lacks arguments to override them once when calling it.

Side note: all these should be documented under plot utils unlike the labels that should actually be in utils. I am also quite sure I was the one to add them all in the wrong place, no need to fix it in this PR, I can open an issue and come back to this or hope someone fixes it before.

Author: Added `show_layout` instead of `show(gridplot([[f1], [f2]]))` in the other example. If this one is modified, the toolbar is visible in only one plot.

Reviewer: sounds great, you have now used `show_layout` more than I have :see_no_evil:

```

> ## Bokeh with Jupyter

Reviewer: probably here instead of on the note at the top of the document we might want to keep shorter and to the point. We should probably mention the `az.output_notebook` is nothing more than a wrapper over the bokeh function with the same (or similar?) name.

:::{note}

> To use Bokeh with JupyterLab, JupyterLab and widgets, please refer to this {doc}`user guide <bokeh:docs/user_guide/jupyter>`.

Reviewer: note to self, check if this could be a `ref` type cross-reference.

Author: I tried `ref` something like ``{ref}`user guide <bokeh:jupyter>`` but it didn't work

Reviewer: the `ref` type target for this page should be `userguide_jupyter`. It is a bit inconvenient, you have to look at the source to see which anchors are defined: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bokeh/bokeh/branch-3.0/sphinx/source/docs/user_guide/jupyter.rst

Author: Updated

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(plotting_with_bokeh)=

# Plotting with Bokeh

Arviz has the option to use {doc}`Bokeh <bokeh:index>` as backend which offers interactive plots. Although most of the functions in the {ref}`plot <plot_api>` module work seamlessly with any backend, some advanced plots may require the use of backend specific features. In this guide, advanced plotting with Bokeh will be covered.

This page can be downloaded as a {jupyter-download:script}`Python script <plotting_with_bokeh>`
or as a {jupyter-download:nb}`Jupyter notebook <plotting_with_bokeh>`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import arviz as az
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np

az.style.use("arviz-darkgrid")

# Confgure Bokeh as backend
az.rcParams["plot.backend"] = "bokeh"
az.output_notebook()
```

:::{note}
To display the plots as output in a Jupyter notebook, it's required to call the function  {func}`arviz.output_notebook` beforehand.
:::

## Customizing plots

> ### Using `backend_kwargs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(bokeh_backend_kwargs)=
### Using `backend_kwargs`
```

In the plot arguments guide we use `common_arg_name`, so following the same idea I think we should add these anchors here.

Author: I added the 6 anchors. Let me know how we should refer to them in the arguments guide. Something like see `ref_matplotlib` or `ref_bokeh`?

Reviewer: In the plot arguments guide I'd probably leave two links only, one per backend referencing the top of the file anchor. The argument specific ones should be referenced from the respective descriptions in the docstring (no need to do this here). Once we merge this I think the best would be to update one docstring as an example and then open an issue to signal other people they can also work on this.

The `backend_kwargs` argument can be very useful for some specific configuration. That is parameters available in {class}`bokeh:bokeh.plotting.figure.Figure`.

As an example, the following code changes the color background and the plot width.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load data
data = az.load_arviz_data('radon')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
az.plot_posterior(
    data,
    var_names=["g"],
    backend_kwargs={"width": 350, 
                    "background_fill_color": "#d3d0e3"});
```

> ### The parameter `show`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(bokeh_show)=
### The parameter `show`
```

The parameter `show` is used to control whether the plot is displayed or not. This behavior can be useful when a plot will be displayed in a grid as the example in the following section.

> ### Defining custom axes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(bokeh_ax)=
### Defining custom axes
```

The `ax` argument of any `plot` function allows to use created axes manually. In the example, this parameter allows to arrange 2 different plots in a grid, set limit to the x axis and share the axes' ranges between the two plots.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from bokeh.io import show
from bokeh.layouts import row
from bokeh.plotting import figure

# load data
observed_data = data.observed_data.y.to_numpy()
# create axes
f1 = figure(x_range=(observed_data.min() - 1, observed_data.max() + 1))
f2 = figure(x_range=f1.x_range, y_range=f1.y_range)
# plot
az.plot_ppc(data, group="prior", num_pp_samples=100, show=False, ax=f1)
az.plot_ppc(data, group="posterior", num_pp_samples=100, show=False, ax=f2)

az.show_layout([[f1], [f2]])
```

:::{note}

> {func}`az.show_layout` creates a bokeh layout and calls shows if `shows` is `True` which is the default behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{func}`arviz.show_layout` creates a bokeh layout and calls shows if `show`. The default value of `show` is set by the rcParam `plot.bokeh.show` (which defaults to `True`)
```

Author: I changed this part. However, seeing the [code](https://python.arviz.org/en/latest/_modules/arviz/plots/backends.html#show_layout), the default is `True`, only if `show` is `None` takes the value from the rcParam.

```
def show_layout(show=True, force_layout=False):
    """Create a layout and call bokeh show."""
    if show is None:
        print("Default value")
    if show:
        print("It shows")
        
show_layout(show=None)
show_layout()
```

Author: All good! I just removed that

:::

### Extending ArviZ-Bokeh plots

> Arviz plot returns a {class}`~bokeh.plotting.Figure` object, therefore different Bokeh plots can be combined into a plot created using Arviz:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arviz plot returns a {class}`~bokeh.plotting.Figure` object, therefore different Bokeh plots can be added to a plot created using Arviz:
```

Author: Changed

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load data
data = az.load_arviz_data('regression1d')
X = data.observed_data.y_dim_0.values
Y = data.observed_data.y.values
y_pp = data.posterior_predictive.y.values
# plot
f1 = figure(plot_width=600, plot_height=600, toolbar_location="below")
az.plot_hdi(X, y_pp, color="#b5a7b6", show=False, ax=f1)
f1.scatter(X, Y, marker="circle", fill_color="#0d7591")

show(f1)
```

> Similarly, custom axes allow to display Arviz and Matplotlib plots in the same grid. In this example, the plot in `ax1` has an Arviz plot modified with a Matplotlib plot and the `ax2` has a `scatter` created using Matplotlib.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, custom axes allow to display Arviz and Bokeh plots in the same grid. In this example, the plot in `f1` has an Arviz plot extended with a Bokeh plot and `f2` has a `scatter` created using Bokeh directly.
```

Author: That happens when you copy paste 🙈 
Changed

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load data
observed_data = data.observed_data.y.values
# create axes
f1 = figure(plot_width=400, plot_height=400, toolbar_location="below")
f2 = figure(plot_width=400, plot_height=400, toolbar_location="below")
# plot
az.plot_hdi(X, y_pp, color="#b5a7b6", show=False, ax=f1)
f1.line(X, y_pp.mean(axis=(0, 1)), color="black")
f2.scatter(X, Y, marker="circle", fill_color="#0d7591")

show(row(f1, f2))
```

## Bokeh with Jupyter

:::{note}
In Juptyer notebooks, Arviz offers {func}`arviz.output_notebook` which is a wrapper over {func}`bokeh.io.output.output_notebook`.

To use Bokeh with JupyterLab, JupyterLab and widgets, please refer to this {doc}`user guide <bokeh:docs/user_guide/jupyter>`.
:::

## Server mode

:::{note}
In the examples above, bokeh is being used in `Standalone` mode. 

> Bokeh can be also used to create interactive web applications. For more details see {doc}`Running a Bokeh server <bokeh:docs/user_guide/server>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bokeh can be also used to create interactive web applications. For more details see {ref}`Running a Bokeh server <bokeh:userguide_server>`.
```

ref: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bokeh/bokeh/branch-3.0/sphinx/source/docs/user_guide/server.rst
